within the last two years a major new
style of rhetoric emerged in the vegan
movement and one person deserves more
credit than anyone else for the
emergence of that style a young man
named Isaac his YouTube channel is
called ask yourself I'm gonna give this
method known as the name the trait
method the highest praise possible in
this video and that goes as follows this
approach to explaining veganism and
challenging non vegans about their
belief systems is going to become
ubiquitous and invisible in veganism the
same way that wrenches and hammers and
nail guns all hang on the wall of the
tool shop as different types of tools
appropriate for different types of
activities when a new tool is first
discovered or announced or tried out
there will be a brief period of
enthusiasm and maybe even a period when
people are overestimating how useful
that new tool is like you know when
computers are first invented any think
computers are gonna help you wash the
dishes
well doesn't quite work that way but it
turns out computers have all kinds of
other applications in our life likewise
there are different tools for different
tasks but the emergence of this method
of this style of rhetoric within
veganism I think is a permanent addition
to our toolbox and it's a tool that
certain types of people engaged in
certain types of advocacy are going to
go to again and again now implicit in
this praise this is this is high praise
for me but it is limited praise as I
said from my very first encounter with
this method on Isaac's channel it's an
approach that's only going to work for
certain personality types and for
solving certain types of problems so I
have now seen Isaac deploying this type
of rhetoric engaging with meat-eaters
engaging in debates live from various
angles and from with various types of
people if there is one problem that the
name the trait argument does not solve
if there's one bridge it can't cross or
I don't know one issue it can't approach
it is the fundamental problem of I don't
care it's the fundamental problem of
talking to someone who's
counter-argument to you is neither
logical nor
emotional is neither based on an appeal
to tradition nor them explaining how
much they love the taste of meat we're
fundamentally what you're up against
is indifference I think Isaac is more
aware than anyone else that his style of
rhetoric can't overcome that obstacle
however it can come very close to
convincing people
so try veganism or convert to being
vegan depending on what ideals those
people are already committed to what
values they hold and in many cases
values they hold that they've never
examined or questioned themselves I
would not want to speculate on what kind
of personality is that gets drawn in and
fascinated by the name of the trait
argument and it's fair to say I am NOT
that kind of personality if anything I
think I underestimated just how many
people this is a useful tool for for
dealing with because to me the type of
issue name the trait engages with the
challenge of challenges people on is
extremely obvious it's not what to me
the issues being raised like yeah of
course it's so obvious but I'm the kind
of person who doesn't need to be talked
to veganism right I've in many ways I'm
a very unusual person I think
psychologically as well as as
intellectually so what I'm gonna find
interesting what I'm gonna find
intriguing or what I'm gonna find
challenging is very very different from
the the mass of humanity it's very
different from the majority of people
who are even on the internet engaging
these discussions and let's point out
again the type of person who will come
on the internet and engage in a debate
of this kind is very different from your
own grandmother whoever you are watching
this yes it's possible I'm saying this
to the one person in a million whose
grandmother is literally on Isaac's
Dischord server every night listening to
these debates and trying to talk about
vegan ethics and morality and philosophy
I doubt it
so there are generational gaps there are
sub cultural gaps that separate people
for whom this approach works and from it
doesn't I have to say also I really
never saw any use for a so called
consistency test before but Isaac has
used this are
on me to actually prove to me that my
own views about veganism were more
consistent than I thought they were
Isaac has cross-examined me several
times where I said look my own
philosophy has flaws and inconsistencies
something I'm quite willing to kind of
warmly admit or you know approaches
people say look I have my own
limitations
I have points where I say sorry babe
yeah this construction noise gonna blow
us at the wheel
Thanks um that's the problem with having
a higher quality microphone we're gonna
pick up noise pollution more accurate
than ever there are points where I'm
quite willing to say to people in a warm
down-to-earth tone I don't have all the
answers or I I make a hypocrite out of
myself in this circumstance or that
circumstance and it's interesting that
I've been cross-examined by Isaac where
he said to me no you think you're being
inconsistent but you're not because you
would actually apply the same standard
to a human being so I had for example
one of the inconsistencies my own
philosophy as I described it I would
always point out to people that if a
bear climbs into a human home comes into
a human basement and it's trying to eat
the garbage or trying to eat the food
out of the kitchen or something a
problem that's common enough in Canada
this is a situation where I believe in
having to resort to violence as a vegan
I would prefer if the bear can be
tranquilized and removed without harm to
the forest but in real world reality
very often we end up hurting these bears
or indeed just killing these bears
because we don't have an economically
affordable better method now ask
yourself flipped the the name that trade
argument against me in this situation
you said but how does that differ from
how you would treat a human being in the
same circumstance if there's a human
being who is crazed or brain damaged or
so high on drugs that their behavior is
really similar to a bear they're in a
state of rage insensate rage or what
have you thrashing around in a house
eating the garbage or whatever it is
they're broken in the window and you
can't extricate them not violently don't
you think that even though it's tragic
even though you'd prefer to see them
shot with a tranquilizer gun and removed
without harming them don't you likewise
think
the use of violence is applicable to a
human being in the circumstance the same
way that it would be applied to a bear
that for me was a totally original
thought that I I had never questioned my
own philosophy in that way
and I had to stop and realize okay this
idea of applying a consistency test to
how do we solve problems in the human
ethical sphere and then applying that
mutatis mutandis to the animal of
ethical sphere this is obviously
something that can be pretty powerful
and revelatory for a variety of human
personality times I have seen directly
meat eaters who are deeply committed to
the idea of their own philosophical
sophistication whose ego is attached to
the notion of being logical and
consistent I have seen them drawn into
questioning their own morality in
questioning veganism and then actually
adopting veganism by this argument now
to me that is very alien I came into
this I discussed this in an immediately
prior video I came into veganism already
wanting to make a positive difference in
the world so I'm in the I'm in the I'm
at the diametric opposite end of the
spectrum from someone who starts off in
the position that they don't care or
that they're just trying to enjoy their
life they just want to maximize their
experience of pleasure and they don't
care about the consequences I'm at the
obvious extreme where my perspective is
I'm looking to save the planet and it's
not clear to me if I can do that through
ecological activism through something
like activism that's that's linked to
trying to regrow the forest or a limit
deforestation or something like that or
what kind of method I should use and
then I encounter and start to fasten on
to vegan activism as one way to to make
progress one way to advocate for
whatever save the planet address serious
you know ethical and ecological and
political issues in our in our time
however the bulk of people are at all
times only applying the limited part of
their brain that deals with ethics to
human ethical problems so I think it's
clear that for many types of people
getting them to apply that same part of
their brain
the same moral habits and values that
they've cultivated to people and then to
apply them to animals and a question if
there's an asymmetry between the two of
what value is it now again this is this
is totally alien to me okay I should say
all right we'll do this one step at a
time here one of the most common
scenarios that Isaac deals with that is
dealt with on ask yourself YouTube
channel and is his live debates his
discourse server and so on is that he
will challenge people why do they treat
a pig differently from a human being
given that a pig is about as intelligent
as a three-year-old child three oral
team a child is about the same
intelligences an adult pig this kind of
thing and very often the response will
be not always very often people will say
that they justify killing animals for
meat because animals are less
intelligent human beings and then the
question inevitably becomes would you or
would you not accept making mentally
disabled people into hamburgers so if
there are if there is a population of
people on the earth and there is who are
so mentally that they're at the
level of a pig or below the level of pig
if they're if they're at the dotted line
where ever you draw the dotted line at
the intelligence of a cow or a pig would
you kill those people and mash them up
to make hamburgers ammonia and I have
seen how people react to this challenge
now again me it proves to me again I you
know I've always been aware to some
extent I'm an eccentric but it doesn't
each of the people engaged in this
conversation they're eccentric Saul so
there's obviously a certain personality
type or a certain category people within
our culture and maybe it's
disproportionately the type of people
who play video games the type of people
who spend long hours in the Internet
maybe it's disproportionately people who
grow up I think frankly on a kind of ego
trip that they're philosophically
sophisticated because of things they've
read on the internet that were better
than the education of philosophy they
received in formal school or you know
better than there were their own
teachers their own would be role models
lacked the kind of philosophical
sophistication that there are people
whose sense of self esteem is really
predicated on feeling that they're right
and being guided through this kind of
Q&A session for them
I've seen the kind of transformative and
highly motivating effect that it can
have so what is the future for the name
that trait argument I'm sorry I prefer
to say that trait it's name of the trait
this stealth
this style of rhetoric I do think that
like any new tool and it is a new tool
sorry she's got to come back to that it
once it's novelty has worn off it does
to some extent fade in the background
it's just another tool that's up on the
shelf and probably when you're talking
to your grandmother it's not going to be
a tool you're gonna go to and use and
when you're talking to another type of
person maybe it's a tool you're gonna
try it's a way to broach the topic
you're gonna deal with and it's a way in
which you and a vegan may be better
prepared for some of the anti vegan
arguments you deal with face to face to
what extent is this a new tool because
again I'm giving Isaak more credit than
he claims to himself here I think it is
dramatically and fundamentally a new
tool because when this line of reasoning
was employed by Peter Singer Peter
Singer who's in many ways an anti vegan
intellectual who was mistaken for vegan
Peter singers argument went in the exact
opposite direction his argument was that
any sense of moral obligation towards
another person should be based entirely
on their level of cognition and he put
the dotted line the line between human
and subhuman much much higher than the
level of cognition that a pig has or
that a person might have Peter
Singer is the ultimate example of
someone who openly and flagrantly says
that children born with mental
disabilities have no rights and can and
should be exterminated
and in his own intentionally careless
wording he goes out of his way to say
that such a child a child and
it's again it's he's how does
the child need to be for this to be true
as long as the parents would have
another child with better prospects
quote unquote better prospect then the
first child can be eliminated so this
obviously quite intentionally leaves a
door open to infanticide for children
with pretty minor
forms of mental impairment or mental
retardation he's not at all putting up
the line at Lowe and Peter singer takes
this further to say Peter singers
mission was and still is and always has
been that he has no objection to people
killing animals and no objection to
people eating meat he simply wants these
animals to be treated decently or with
decency and his standards for decency of
course from my perspective are
completely surreal you know they live
their whole life on a farm castrated in
a in a cage and then one day someone
comes and slits their throat I mean how
decent can this possibly be so you know
I think it's not enough to just say that
Isaac came along and put the finishing
touches on something Peter Singer did
imperfectly previously I think that
Isaac has really transcended and
transformed a deeply flawed and immoral
argument the Peter Singer presented I I
don't know what his thought process was
when he when he came up with this and I
see no resemblance between what Isaac is
now doing an ancient authors like
Porfiry I had I had a good translation
of poor fury you're in my apartment
quite some time I'm just being honest
you I do think that this is actually
really an innovative and new style of
rhetoric style of Socratic dialogue or
style of cross-examination and I'm sorry
I've heard Isaac say this in his own
terms earlier I said it does not
approach the problem of I don't care
it's not gonna approach the problem of a
fundamental lack of motivation if you're
talking to someone who you know has no
motivation to do good rather than evil
or to care about negative outcomes
rather than having no outcomes or
positive someone who wants to take no
responsibility for the consequences of
their actions however it's really
interesting for me to see that very
often the next steps that follow after
this conversation come back to my core
philosophy on this channel which is of
asking the person what kind of person do
you want to be what what kind of
character do you think you are or what
kind of character do you do you want to
have for me that's for the first
question in the discourse movie nism not
the final one but it's interesting that
it comes at the end of the discourse in
Isaac's rhetorical style because the
process of questioning why would you
treat animals differently from human
beings what is the trait that justifies
our treating animals differently from
human beings in many ways indirectly it
does get at the question of to you what
does it mean to be human what is your
sense of yourself as a person what is
your sense of yourself in terms of the
unique human responsibility you have
that a course makes you different from a
lion that makes you different from a
shark that makes you different from a
monkey in the jungle or an ant burrowing
under the earth there's obviously some
sense in which you're aware of yourself
having agency and having
responsibilities perhaps moral and
ethical responsibilities or however you
want to to style it there's something
you feel that marks you out as a person
and as an individual and perhaps human
species as a whole for most of it and
then question is not merely
descriptively what is that difference
but prescriptively
what do you want that difference to be
what do you think humanity is capable of
because it's not just this and what do
you think you're capable of not just
what's the minimum standard at which
human beings should not be thrown in
prison but what do you think the maximum
standard is that you aspire to so I have
seen this played out and I can say name
the trait it's not one tool that fixes
all problems it's not gonna fix a leaky
faucet and at the same time you know
seal up the bottom of a leaky boat
different tool set for different kinds
of problems but I do think that what
Isaac has done and it's it's very
indicative of how important YouTube and
the Internet are in the 21st century in
contrast to new ideas coming into the
movement through court cases like the
founding of of peda in contrast to
things coming to movement through you
know low end terrorist groups like the
al f or what
you or ideas coming to the movement
through formal academic publications and
books we're now into an era where I
think major new ideas new directions
that the movement takes on and new
styles of rhetoric new ways of engaging
issue they are emerging on the Internet
first and foremost and in in this this
kind of discourse so I have no idea what
Isaac is gonna do next with his career I
suspect he'll get bored of YouTube and
go back to university and pursue other
careers but I do think this is a
permanent addition to to vegan discourse
and it's an incredibly positive
development compared to what I've seen
even just in the last six years say meat
last 10-15 years veganism has gone
through various fads and most of them
have come and gone without leaving any
permanent addition to our toolkit so
Isaac used to you